Article | On reading, comprehension and having original thoughts. (#3)
pheymann/paulheymann-website: _posts/2020-05-28-on-reading-comprehension-original-thoughts.md

---
layout: post

> title: On reading, comprehension and having original thoughts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: On reading, comprehension, and having original thoughts
```

This is always a way to spark a debate amongst English speakers and probably people in other languages. The Oxford comma. I'm pro-Oxford comma, probably because I'm a developer and I don't like ambiguity. In this case it's perfectly clear what you mean, but then other times you have a sentence like "the dinner options are pizza, burgers, pasta and meatballs" Are pasta and meatballs separate options or served together?

Anyway, in this particular case I think the Oxford comma lends some gravity to the title as you pause to consider each item separately. Up to you!

Author: I like the idea of making the wording less ambiguous. I will follow the Oxford lead.

date:   2020-05-28
categories: learning
head_title: On reading, comprehension and having original thoughts
meta_description: A reading approach aiming for comprehension and having original thoughts.
meta_keywords: reading,books,papers,understanding
---

> Each seeing the same gleam in the other’s eyes: the excitement of learning, of finding order where there had seemed only chaos. (*A Fire upon the Deep*, Vernor Vinge)  

> Reading is my main source for new knowledge. It offers explanations for the world surrounding and simply an enjoyable pastime. But for an embarrassingly long time I didn’t realise that there was a gab between my goals, *Comprehension*, *Recall* and having *Original Thoughts* and how I read. The knowledge I gather was often shallow. Sometimes I wasn’t able to reconstruct the reasoning behind a concept, or I wasn’t aware of the limitations of an idea. In other words, I was missing thorough comprehension and the necessary scepticism. To make matters worse, I also forgot most of the acquired knowledge a short while after.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reading is my main source for new knowledge. It offers explanations for the surrounding world and simply an enjoyable pastime. But for an embarrassingly long time I didn’t realise that there was a gap between how I read and my goals: *Comprehension*, *Recall*, and having *Original Thoughts*. The knowledge I gathered was often shallow. Sometimes I wasn’t able to reconstruct the reasoning behind a concept, or I wasn’t aware of the limitations of an idea. In other words, I was missing thorough comprehension and the necessary scepticism. To make matters worse, I also forgot most of the acquired knowledge a short while after.
```

* **gap** not **gab**
* When introducing a list, it's customary to have a semicolon there. Since there was more information after the list, it seemed all right to move it before the list.
* **gathered** not **gather** because it's past tense

Author: BTW, is it `of new knowledge` or `for new knowledge`?

> The main reason for my experience lay in the reading approach I acquired during my time in university. Here, the incentive was more externally and focused on collecting as much information as possible in as little time as possible just to dump it into an exam. What resided in my memory had to vanish to make room for the next chunk of information and the next exam. Rinse and repeat. That process broad me successfully through my studies, but was detrimental to sustainable knowledge acquisition. What I lacked was a principled approach to reading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main reason for my experience is rooted in the reading approach I acquired during my time in university. Here, the incentive was more external and focused on collecting as much information as possible in as little time as possible just to dump it into an exam. What resided in my memory had to vanish to make room for the next chunk of information and the next exam. Rinse and repeat. That process bought me successfully through my studies, but was detrimental to sustainable knowledge acquisition. What I lacked was a principled approach to reading.
```

* *is rooted in* is a nice way to say this. Lay/lie/lying is so complicated that I avoid it entirely. Like it's *lying on the sofa* and *i had a lie-in this morning* but also for telling lies...so I try to avoid it. Up to you :)
* **external** instead of **externally** since you are not modifying a verb.
* **brought** not **broad**

Author: 👍 for `rooted`

Author: Note to myself: there is a typo in this change `bought` instead of `brought`. Fix it after the batch-commit.

		* [Building a knowledge foundation ](#Building%20a%20knowledge%20foundation%20)
		* [Getting an unaltered view](#Getting%20an%20unaltered%20view)
			* [Influence of the author](#Influence%20of%20the%20author)
			* [The type of work](#The%20type%20of%20work)
		* [Limitations of reading the originals](#Limitations%20of%20reading%20the%20originals)
	* [Derivatives for getting an overview or extending our knowledge](#Derivatives%20for%20getting%20an%20overview%20or%20extending%20our%20knowledge)
	* [Conclusion](#Conclusion)
* [Final words](#Final%20words)
* [Appendix](#Appendix)
	* [1: Personal reading setup](#1%3A%20Personal%20reading%20setup)
	* [2: PDFs to ePub and Mobi](#2%3A%20PDFs%20to%20ePub%20and%20Mobi)
	* [3: Educational and densely written books](#3%3A%20Educational%20and%20densely%20written%20books)

## Goals
The goals I set out before developing a structured reading approach were the following:

### Comprehension
For the scope of this text, it describes the ability to recreate an idea or concept from scratch, together with all its reasoning. It is also the knowledge about an idea’s limitations and assumptions.

### Recall

> This reading approach has to support moving information into the long-term memory through time-spaced repetition. But since there are no guarantees that all information stay in memory a compressed version of the book’s content is needed, which allows easy and fast access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This reading approach has to support moving information into long-term memory through time-spaced repetition. But since there are no guarantees that all information stays in memory, a compressed version of the book’s content is needed to allow for fast and easy access.
```

* **stays** not **stay**
* I added a comma after _memory_ to balance the sentence. When using the construct of "beacuse of x, y", it's nice to have a comma to clearly show when you're switching from the condition/clause to the result. 
* the fast and easy switch...this is getting into the real bowels of English writing, but there's actually a "correct" order of adjectives. It's one of those funny things that all English speakers can detect when it's wrong, they can fix it, but can't tell you why. https://twitter.com/MattAndersonNYT/status/772002757222002688/photo/1 https://dictionary.cambridge.org/grammar/british-grammar/adjectives-order. It's hard to put the words _fast_ and _easy_ into one of those buckets but I would say _easy_ is the **type** and _fast_ is the **physical quality**.

Author: Well, that is an arcane rule. That will take a second to remember 😄

### Original Thoughts

> Having original thoughts isn’t meant to be an absolute statement. It is relativistic and personal.  Great books can inspire new ideas on the reader’s side and let him have an original thought. They create new connections and extend his understanding. They also offer that satisfactory feeling of having discovered something new. But in the end a reader’s original thought probably isn’t novel at all. Someone, somewhere most likely has thought it already, maybe he even went so far and wrote it down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having original thoughts isn’t meant to be an absolute statement. It is relativistic and personal.  Great books can inspire new ideas in reader and let him have an original thought. They create new connections and extend his understanding. They also offer that satisfactory feeling of having discovered something new. But in the end a reader’s original thought probably isn’t novel at all. Someone, somewhere most likely has thought it already, maybe he even went so far as to write it down.
```

* Small re-word to not use "side". This must be a common thing in German because I hear it all the time. Using the word "side" like this in English usually implies some kind of opposing forces, like in sports or polarised politics. "Our side has the right idea and the other side is wrong". So it's more natural and typical to just say "from me to you" and not "from my side to your side". I hope that makes some sense?
* the change to **so far as to write it down**...sorry it's one of those things that is standard and sounds better/right to me and I can't explain why. I'm not a grammar master. It's a typical construct to say "went so far as to <do something>".

Author: Shouldn't it be `in a reader` or `in readers` instead of `in reader`?

## The beginning

> Serendipity has it, that I came across Mortimer J. Adler’s [How to Read a Book](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Read_a_Book) while I started to look into different reading approaches. His process appealed to me immediately. It is simple and structured, with thorough comprehension as a goal at its core. Mr. Adler wants us to have a conversation, I would even say debate, with the author. We have to follow his arguments and proofs and try to find counterarguments and criticism. From my understanding it should resemble the dialectic method. It should be like one of these long conversations one has with friends till the dark of night. A back and forth of ideas, arguments and counterarguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As luck would have it, I came across Mortimer J. Adler’s [How to Read a Book](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Read_a_Book) while I started to look into different reading approaches. His process appealed to me immediately. It is simple and structured, with thorough comprehension as a core goal. Mr. Adler wants us to have a conversation, I would even say debate, with the author. We have to follow his arguments and proofs and try to find counterarguments and criticism. From my understanding it should resemble the dialectic method. It should be like one of these long conversations one has with friends till the dark of night. A back and forth of ideas, arguments and counterarguments.
```

* I can't put my finger on why, but starting a sentence with *Serendipity has it* sounds not quite right to me. But starting with "As luck would have it* is quite a common phrase.
* *a core goal* makes for easier reading (opinion)

I used Mr. Adler’s approach as a starting point and adjusted and optimised it where needed until I ended up with the first stable version described below.

## The reading approach

> When I say first stable version it means the process went through many phases and still continues so. It is bound to constant change to ensure that everything that hampers learning progress gets improved. To describe its shape as volatile also serves as an argument for continued experimentation until the reading it fits like a glove. That is true for me and it should be for the reader who adapts the process himself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When I say first stable version it means the process went through many phases and still continues. It is bound to continually evolve to ensure that everything that hampers learning progress can be improved. To describe its shape as volatile also serves as an argument for continued experimentation until the reading it fits like a glove. That is true for me and it should be for the reader who adapts the process to himself.
```

* no *so* at the end of the first sentence. I don't know what the rules are with this, but I think it only works in certain ways like "It's the way because I say so." or "And it continues to do so".
* *constant change* functions as a noun but its place in the sentence should be as a verb. I think It's nice to say "continually evolve"
* replaced *gets* with *can be*. I wish I had a good explanation for why it sounds better
* small change at the end with *to himself* since adapting the process to a person is more specific and meaningful than to just say that you adapted it.

I'm not sure what you mean with *until the reading it fits like a glove* but that could use a re-wording. Let me know the intent and we'll find a new way to word it.

Author: `the reading` shouldn't be there. I think it is a remnant of a previous sentence.

In general, the process in its current shape is split up into five distinct stages:

	* Getting an overview of a book’s content, so we are sure it has what we are looking for. It also serves as a way to create a mental map of how that content is structured and conveyed to us.
	

> 	* Reading thoroughly through each chapter. At the same time creating notes and highlights, which will form the basis of a condensed representation of the book.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	* Thoroughly reading through each chapter. At the same time creating notes and highlights which will form the basis of a condensed representation of the book.
```

* The adverb should come before the verb here...I wish I had a grammatical explanation for why. I don't think the way you did it is wrong, it's just not preferred?
* Removed a comma

> 	* Reiterating a chapter’s content, after some time passed, by working through notes and highlights. Doing that, makes sure we only extract the information most relevant to us. The repetition also helps memorization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	* Reiterating a chapter’s content, after some time passed, by working through notes and highlights. Doing that makes sure we only extract the information most relevant to us. The repetition also helps memorization.
```

> 	* Creating an external document from your notes and highlights, for easy access, to collect additional thoughts and to describe overarching concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	* Combining your notes and highlights into a new document that describes the overarching concepts and your additional thoughts.
```

I took a stab at re-wording this. At first I just wanted to remove commas but then it still seemed like it needed a refactor. It might also work to just remove the "for easy access" and its commas.

	
	* Finally, answering open questions and formulating criticism to extend our understanding and gauge the limits of ideas and concepts expressed in the book.

All these steps are structured in a way to guarantee that we can stop at any time and continue later with a minimal amount of effort. Thereby, we are not forced to commit a significant amount of time upfront. That makes it compatible with other commitments everyone has in life, like family and work.

### Stage 1: Get an overview by skimming the book
Before we start our journey through an author’s book we have to make sure it actually is the thing we are looking for. Nothing is more frustrating than to find oneself half way through a book just to realise it is not elaborating on a specific topic or is missing crucial information.

> Skimming sets am entry bar for books to pass before we read them, but it also helps to create a mental map of their structure. We know in which order what content is unveiled and where the author tries to lead us. It creates a red string, a story line we can follow so not to get lost on the way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Skimming through a book set a bar to entry before we read them, but it also helps to create a mental map of its structure. We know in which order what content is unveiled and where the author tries to lead us. It creates a red string, a story line we can follow so not to get lost on the way.
```

* The *am* instead of *a* caught my eye. The reword I think sounds a bit more direct and to the point, but it could go back to how it was.
* What's a red string?
* I think it's more clear to say *its* rather than *their* since you're talking about a book and not a person.

Author: * I think it was supposed to be an `an` and not `am`, but I like your version better anyway.
* I guess that is something Denglish. In German there exists the term Roter Faden which represents a line or string you follow through a story etc. Not sure what the correct term would be in English.

> To start off we read the introduction, or abstract if it is a scientific paper and the conclusion if available. Afterwards, we go through each chapter by reading the heading and subheadings and apply a brief study of all figures, charts and tables. It is already a sign of quality, from my experience, if figures and the like have descriptions which make them self-explanatory. Making highlights or writing notes during this phase should be avoided. The goal is to get a first impression and an overview as fast as possible. In the end, we might decide not to read the book and any extra time investment is wasted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start off we read the introduction, or abstract if it is a scientific paper, and the conclusion if available. Afterwards, we go through each chapter by reading the heading and subheadings and apply a brief study of all figures, charts, and tables. It is already a sign of quality, from my experience, if figures and the like have descriptions that make them self-explanatory. Making highlights or writing notes during this phase should be avoided. The goal is to get a first impression and an overview as fast as possible. In the end, we might decide not to read the book and any extra time investment is wasted.
```

* The only time I'm adding a comma! I think it nicely separates the three different subjects here.
* I changed the *which* to *that* and actually looked up the grammatical rule this time! How it works is: you use *that* when you have "restrictive clause". Meaning, you are narrowing the scope if things you're talking about. So, "I only eat vegetables that are red". *Which* is a "non-restrictive clause" that describes part of a set, like, "I am eating a pepper, which is red.". So in this case you want to limit the set of figures to ones **that** make them self-explanatory.

> For a brief moment, now, let us concentrate on headings. Sometimes, during our studies, we will experience what can only be called *creative headings*. They do not convey the goal or content of a chapter, but try to be clever and artistic. They are more akin to headings one would find in novels. But they should not be used in works for knowledge acquisition. Creative headings do not help our understanding. We are not able to grasp the meaning until we read the chapter and sometimes even then the meaning might be lost on us. To give a concrete example, take a look at [The Black Swan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Black_Swan:_The_Impact_of_the_Highly_Improbable). Even though I enjoyed the book its headings are atrocious. What does “*Umberto Eco’s Antilibrary, or how we seek validation*” mean? At the same time, experiencing unfavourable headings should make a reader realise and appreciate written works with good headings. To also offer an example here, an interested reader can take a look at [The Wealth of Nations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wealth_of_Nations) or Benjamin Graham’s [The Intelligent Investor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Intelligent_Investor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a brief moment now, let us concentrate on headings. Sometimes during our studies, we will experience what can only be called *creative headings*. They do not convey the goal or content of a chapter, but try to be clever and artistic. They are more akin to headings one would find in novels. But they should not be used in works for knowledge acquisition. Creative headings do not help our understanding. We are not able to grasp the meaning until we read the chapter and sometimes even then the meaning might be lost on us. To give a concrete example, take a look at [The Black Swan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Black_Swan:_The_Impact_of_the_Highly_Improbable). Even though I enjoyed the book, its headings are atrocious. What does “*Umberto Eco’s Antilibrary, or how we seek validation*” mean? At the same time, experiencing unfavourable headings should make a reader realise and appreciate written works with good headings. To also offer an example here, an interested reader can take a look at [The Wealth of Nations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wealth_of_Nations) or Benjamin Graham’s [The Intelligent Investor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Intelligent_Investor).
```

Comma shuffle.

### Stage 2: Analysing a chapter
When we have decided to study the book we will read through each chapter thoroughly. The first goal of this step is to identify and understand the author’s ideas. The second is to begin the compilation of a compressed representation of the book itself by using highlights and notes.

> We start by reading the content with care and without haste. There is nobody who is hurrying us through a written work, we can and have to invest the proper time. Of course, there can be exceptions to that rule when we for example work through a class assignment. But I exclude that for now and assume an intrinsic motivation to read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We start by reading the content with care and without haste. There is nobody who is hurrying us through a written work; we can and have to invest the proper time. Of course, there can be exceptions to that rule when we for example work through a class assignment. But I exclude that for now and assume an intrinsic motivation to read.
```

Used a semicolon instead of a comma since you're transitioning to another...thing

	1. When it seems to be part of the concepts or ideas explained in that chapter. That is, the actual knowledge the author tries to transfer.

	2. When it is a genuinely interesting statement. That might overlap with category (1) or could be something independent.

	3. When it is unknown to us. That is, knowledge which is a requirement. Here additional study is necessary to be able to understand what the author is going for. While reading I usually just skim the topic in question, often using Wikipedia, to get a rough idea. Thus, I am not interrupted from continued reading in the current work for a longer period, which at least to me is unsatisfactory and distracting.
	
	4. When it looks somehow wrong, as if the author made a mistake and we start to formulate a question or criticism. Here it is, that we develop the deepest understanding of the underlying work and its limitations. It is also the part which can and often will require another significant time investment.
	
	5. When it is missing supporting facts and proofs. Either we have to find them or it turns out to be a criticism, because of the lack thereof.

> The reader is best advised not to highlight all text passages in the same color. Otherwise, he will invest a significant amount of time afterwards in reconstructing the categories, again. He might choose a color for each category. As a personal preference, I combine (1) and (2) under the same color.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reader is best advised not to highlight all text passages in the same color. Otherwise, he will invest a significant amount of time afterwards in reconstructing the categories again. He might choose a color for each category. As a personal preference, I combine (1) and (2) under the same color.
```

> Of course, sometimes it isn’t enough to just highlight a passage of text. Some statements or even whole works can be extraordinary dense and require extra information to be comprehensible. One example of such a book is John Maynard Keynes’ [The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_General_Theory_of_Employment,_Interest_and_Money) Here, writing down notes next to a highlight is a necessity. As a general guide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, sometimes it isn’t enough to just highlight a passage of text. Some statements or even whole works can be extraordinarily dense and requires extra information to be comprehensible. One example of such a book is John Maynard Keynes’ [The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_General_Theory_of_Employment,_Interest_and_Money). Here, writing down notes next to a highlight is a necessity. As a general guide:
```

* *extraordinarily* since it's an adverb
* *requires* not *require*

> * We add information which we need to understand a text passage, like context or a more verbose version of the passage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We add information which we need in order to understand a text passage, like context or a more verbose version of the passage.
```

I think changing this to *in order to* avoids a possible mis-read of this sentence. The first time I read it, my brain wanted to read it as one chunk like "We add information which we need to understand" and only when I read beyond did I realise that was not the way it was meant. So, using *in order to* avoids that.

* It is advisable to just write down a couple of words and leave the complete formulation to a later stage. That makes sure we are not blocked for long, but the note should still provide enough information so we don’t forget what the highlight was all about.

While reading we will encounter the phenomenon that some criticism, questions or overarching concepts cannot be highlighted directly in the book. There is simply not a single sentence or paragraph expressing it. The only option I found is to write them down somewhere else, for example into an notebook. Again, a personal recommendation is to not fully formulate them at that stage. Just noting some words and phrases and putting references to the book or external resources should be enough for the beginning.

> At some point we will reach the end of the chapter. Depending on the length and hardness of it we might either continue reading or we go to the next stage of this reading approach.

Reviewer: hardness: do you mean difficulty or density or maybe both?

Author: Both. For some reason I liked the word and just stuck with it.

### Stage 3: Reiterating a chapter by working through highlights and notes

> When we decide that there is enough raw material, meaning highlights and notes, we start to iterate it. That means we read through all of the material we haven’t processed so far.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we decide that there is enough raw material, meaning highlights and notes, we start to iterate it. That means we read through all of the material we haven’t yet processed.
```

Just opinion that this sounds a bit nicer.

> * We adjust a highlight’s range if it isn’t capturing all the text necessary to unveil its meaning. That includes extending and reducing the range. Personally, I rather tend to mark a bit more and have a proper sentence. It makes reading them again more pleasant. And we have to keep in mind highlights are part of the compressed representation of the book, which we will look up and read frequently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We adjust a highlight’s range if it isn’t capturing all the text necessary to unveil its meaning. That includes extending and reducing the range. Personally, I rather tend to mark a bit more and have a proper sentence. It makes reading them again more pleasant. And we have to keep in mind that highlights are part of the compressed representation of the book, which we will look up and read frequently.
```

Adding *that* here introduces the...clause I think is the right word?

* We add or remove whole highlights where needed.

> * We formulate the former word clouds in our notes into proper paragraphs.

Reviewer: former? former what?

Author: `former word clouds`: we transform these work clouds into paragraphs.

* Of course, we now have to read up on the unknown concepts from category (3). When we only read the introduction of a Wikipedia article before, we now read it completely and some additional text if necessary to get a better overview. If the topic at hand should warrant a deeper analysis I prefer to put a book into my [Anti-Library](?). After we have done all that we can put a concise summary into our notebook. The last step is to remove highlights of this category from our book to not clutter the content we try to extract.

> * Where we described open questions, criticism and overarching concepts before only with a few notes and references we now fully formulate them. After some time passed, with continued reading and putting some thought into them we will reach a point where we are sure that it actually warrants that extra energy and we also have a better understanding of them. So it could happen for example that a former criticism vanishes, because we realise a flaw in our understanding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Where we described open questions, criticism and overarching concepts before only with a few notes and references, we now fully formulate them. After some time passed, with continued reading and putting some thought into them, we will reach a point where we are sure that it actually warrants that extra energy and we also have a better understanding of them. So it could happen for example that a former criticism vanishes because we realise a flaw in our understanding.
```

I'm starting to think English and German have totally different rules for comma usage. I can't put my finger on it, but it's really got me curious.

> After we finished post processing our highlights and notes we compiled a compressed representation of the underlying chapter. We also recalled all necessary information, which will help in persisting them in our long term memory. The effect is similar to [Spaced repetition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaced_repetition). Besides that, going through that material also helps to discover more overarching concepts or criticism. Some thoughts develop over several pages or even sections and sometimes go unnoticed while we are intensively reading. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After we finish post processing our highlights and notes, we compile a compressed representation of the underlying chapter. We also recalled all necessary information, which will help in persisting them in our long term memory. The effect is similar to [Spaced repetition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaced_repetition). Besides that, going through that material also helps to discover more overarching concepts or criticism. Some thoughts develop over several pages or even sections and sometimes go unnoticed while we are reading intensely. 
```

Maybe I misunderstood the intent with the first sentence, but are you saying that we now do the compiling? A sentence starting with "after" should be balanced so it's like "After this, then that". So I think the change I made makes sense, as long as it is true to your original meaning. 

And I don't know why, but "reading intensely" sounds better to me.

> Producing this extract also makes sure we don’t have to read the book in one go. We can just stop in between and come back later. To be able to continue we only have to take a glance at our highlights and notes to refresh hour memories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Producing this extract also makes sure we don’t have to read the book in one go. We can just stop in between and come back later. To be able to continue we only have to take a glance at our highlights and notes to refresh our memories.
```

### Stage 4: Extracting highlights and notes into a stand-alone document
When we reached the end of the book we compiled a collection of highlights and notes, which are scattered across the book itself and a notebook. In this shape all this is scarcely helpful. To refresh ones memory or to search for specific information will be a tedious task. What we actually need is a single place holding all the work we have done.

Creating that representation will be more or less time consuming depending on the readers setup. If he is a digital reader he will probably have an export option in his app and can extract all highlights and notes without  much effort. On the other had, if his approach is more traditional it falls upon him to write out all highlights.

> The next step of this phase is to create a heading structure for the exported highlights. I recommend to discard the author’s headings and begin anew by keeping the original chapter structure and by splitting the highlights apart based on topics. By doing so, we are able to partition information into coherent groups and provide headings which are meaningful. Apart from that, it also forces us to read through the content, which helps memorization and might unveil again some hidden criticism, question or knowledge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step of this phase is to create a heading structure for the exported highlights. I recommend discarding the author’s headings and beginning anew by keeping the original chapter structure and by splitting the highlights apart based on topics. By doing so, we are able to partition information into coherent groups and provide headings which are meaningful. Apart from that, it also forces us to read through the content, which helps memorization and might unveil again some hidden criticism, question or knowledge.
```

For some reason it sounds a little off to me to say "recommend to {infinitive verb}" rather than just "recommend {verb in gerund form}"

## On reading original works and derivatives
> There are, of course, many books worth reading well. There is a much larger number that should be only inspected. (*How to read a book*, Mortimer Adler)  

So far we discussed how to accomplish the goals of *Comprehension*, *Recall* and having *Original Thoughts* set out at the beginning. In this chapter we will examine which types of written works are best suited for this set of goals. Depending on the expected level of understanding we can make a distinction between what can be called *Foundational Works* and *Derivatives*.

### Foundational Works
It is the first written work which puts a concept or idea in a coherent form. It is often the foundation of a field of knowledge. Examples are [The Wealth of Nations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wealth_of_Nations) by Adam Smith which is the foundational work for classical economics, or  Albert Einstein’s Special and General Theory of Relativity which created the basis of our modern understanding of gravity.

### Derivatives

> All works which are based on that foundations. They extend them, provide interpretations and opinions, or produce a partial, often condensed view of the matter. Translations can also fall into this category, but we will discuss this specific topic later on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All works which are based on that foundation. They extend them, provide interpretations and opinions, or produce a partial, often condensed view of the matter. Translations can also fall into this category, but we will discuss this specific topic later on.
```

*All works which are based on that foundation* is this meant to define *Derivatives*? It's a sentence fragment and should be made whole.

Author: Maybe _Works which are based on or derived from these foundations are Derivatives._ ?

> Of course, it isn’t a statement about a works quality if it falls into one category or the other, but rather helps us to make a decision when to read what kind of book or paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, it isn’t a statement about a work's quality if it falls into one category or the other, but rather helps us to make a decision when to read what kind of book or paper.
```

### Foundational works for thorough understanding
I recommend to an active reader to go with foundational works when he tries to achieve thorough understanding. The reasons for that are given in the following section.

#### Building a knowledge foundation 

> These works are the first of their kind. They do not require a priori understanding of the field to be comprehensible. They do not cut away the context and history of how the work came into being. Foundational books and papers provide material to build up a strong knowledge foundation which is a prerequisite to understanding works which extend its field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These works are the first of their kind. They do not require a prior understanding of the field to be comprehensible. They do not cut away the context and history of how the work came into being. Foundational books and papers provide material to build up a strong knowledge foundation which is a prerequisite to understanding works which extend its field.
```

Furthermore, when we acquired these basic mental tools we can put derived works into their context. We understand what they try to change and where their limitations are.

#### Getting an unaltered view
Derivatives may alter the foundation works and therefore the view on its knowledge. That change can happen in different ways. 

##### Influence of the author

> The author who creates a derived work might inject his opinion and ideology. He then will put more emphasis on ideas and concepts which will help his cause and neglect others. Another influence on an author’s work is his own comprehension. There is the possibility that he doesn’t understands the topic properly himself and therefore his derivatives have to reflect that lack of understanding. When the foundations aren’t strong how can the building on top be?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The author who creates a derived work might inject his opinion and ideology. He then will put more emphasis on ideas and concepts which will help his cause and neglect others. Another influence on an author’s work is his own comprehension. There is the possibility that he doesn’t understand the topic properly himself and therefore his derivatives have to reflect that lack of understanding. When the foundations aren’t strong how can the building on top be?
```

##### The type of work
Even if the author stayed close the original work and understood it properly, the type of work he tries to derive might change the view in itself. If his goal is to produce a summary the reasoning cannot be as thorough, the history and context as complete. On the other hand, if the goal is to extend the field there is usually no point in rephrasing its whole corpus of knowledge again. The author will formulate his findings and describe how it connects to the corpus. It is upon the reader to have the required understanding of the field’s foundations.

> The above example describe derivates which alter the foundations to some extend, but there is one type of derived work which tries to be as close to the original as possible, the translation. But even here alterations have to happen. Translating text suffers from the illness of information loss. The meaning of a phrase in one language might be hard to translate into another. The meaning changes, so does the view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example describe derivates which alter the foundations to some extend, but there is one type of derived work which tries to be as close to the original as possible: the translation. But even here alterations have to happen. Translating text suffers from the illness of information loss. The meaning of a phrase in one language might be hard to translate into another. The meaning changes, so does the view.
```

Should be a semicolon since you're introducing a separate subject all on its own. (That's probably not the actual grammar rule :p)

#### Limitations of reading the originals

> Of course, there are practical limitations to a *foundational works first* approach. Sometimes they simply aren’t the right source. For example we want to get get an overview. A summary might yield better results here. Another hindrance can be language. We decide to read a book written in a foreign language we haven’t mastered. In that case, we only have two options, we learn the language or we use a translation. Which one is more appropriate depends solely on the reader and his preferences. In the end, the goal is understanding but the time investment most be sensible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, there are practical limitations to a *foundational works first* approach. Sometimes they simply aren’t the right source. For example we want to get get an overview. A summary might yield better results here. Another hindrance can be language. We decide to read a book written in a foreign language we haven’t mastered. In that case, we only have two options: we learn the language or we use a translation. Which one is more appropriate depends solely on the reader and his preferences. In the end, the goal is understanding but the time investment most be sensible.
```

Semicolon when introducing a list.

> One limitation specific to the digital reader is the availability of the work as digital copy. If it doesn’t exist it cannot be integrated into the reader’s setup. Fortunately, for many foundational works the [Gutenberg Project](https://www.gutenberg.org/) did a tremendous job in providing different digital formats at no cost. We also can find prominent books in its digital form on platforms like Amazon. Where there is a demand, there will be supply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One limitation specific to the digital reader is the availability of the work as digital copy. If it doesn’t exist it cannot be integrated into the reader’s setup. Fortunately, for many foundational works the [Gutenberg Project](https://www.gutenberg.org/) did a tremendous job in providing different digital formats at no cost. We also can find prominent books in their digital forms on platforms like Amazon. Where there is a demand, there will be supply.
```
*their forms* agrees with the plural *books*

### Derivatives for getting an overview or extending our knowledge
Starting with the foundations makes sure we are building up the same foundations in our head, a prerequisite for continued reading and research. But not every art and science is equally interesting or important us. When only an overview or rough grasp of the concepts of a field is required working through a summary can be an advisable approach. 

On the other hand, when we already have a basic understanding we might extend that with new criticism we didn’t find on our own, new ideas and concepts which derive from the originals, or to bring the foundations into a modern context.

### Conclusion
What type of written work we select will depend on multiply factors and we have to analyse them before we make our decision. But if our goal should be thorough understanding of a field we are well advised to start with the foundational works, because they will provide us with the necessary basis.

## Final words

> I will use the final words of this text to emphasis two points important to any reader who might decide to adopt the approach described above. First, as everything it has its limitations. This process cannot be applied to every book. For example, the content of some written works is truly dense and using highlights would extract significant parts of the text, which doesn’t make for a compressed representation. More on that in [Appendix 3](#3:%20Educational%20and%20dense%20books) . This reading approach worked for many historic foundational books and papers, but it can fail with other types. We have to keep that in mind and continue experimenting and improving this reading approach when friction arises.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I will use the final words of this text to emphasise two points important to any reader who might decide to adopt the approach described above. First, everything it has its limitations. This process cannot be applied to every book. For example, the content of some written works is truly dense and using highlights would extract significant parts of the text, which doesn’t make for a compressed representation. More on that in [Appendix 3](#3:%20Educational%20and%20dense%20books) . This reading approach worked for many historic foundational books and papers, but it can fail with other types. We have to keep that in mind and continue experimenting and improving this reading approach when friction arises.
```

* starting a clause with *as* needs to be balanced, like *as this, then that*, but since there was no second bit there, I just removed the *as*

Author: Works for me, but unfortunately you forgot to remove `everything`: `First, everything it has its limitations`. I guess it should be `First, it has its limitations.`

> One last emphasis I want to make is that any interested reader should go back to the original source of this text, Mortimer Adler’s [How to Read a Book](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Read_a_Book). He describes, better than I can, why it matters to read and to read thoroughly and his arguments are even more prevalent today as they were during his time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One last point I want to emphasise is that any interested reader should go back to the original source of this text, Mortimer Adler’s [How to Read a Book](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Read_a_Book). He describes, better than I can, why it matters to read and to read thoroughly and his arguments are even more prevalent today as they were during his time.
```

You can't make an emphasis. You can only emphasise or place emphasis.

Also, I think you're sticking with American English in this? If so then emphasize :)

## Appendix
### 1: Personal reading setup

> In this section I will describe my personal setup for those who are interested. I am a digital reader. I have my books, highlights and notes with me no matter where I go. I don’t need to remind myself to take all the reading necessities with me all the time, they are simply just there. This setup also makes sure that backups a created frequently. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section I will describe my personal setup for those who are interested. I am a digital reader. I have my books, highlights and notes with me no matter where I go. I don’t need to remind myself to take all the reading necessities with me all the time, they are just there. This setup also makes sure that backups are created frequently. 
```

* *just* and *simply* in this context mean the same thing, so you can only use one

> I use Amazon’s Kindle app across all my devices. It supports highlights and note taking and has an export functionality. Unfortunately, the app only produces HTML, which doesn’t read well in a document. Therefore, I transform it into Markdown which I then embed into my document. The transformation is done with the [following script](?).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I use Amazon’s Kindle app across all my devices. It supports highlights and note taking and has an export function. Unfortunately, the app only produces HTML which doesn’t read well in a document. Therefore, I transform it into Markdown which I then embed into my document. The transformation is done with the [following script](?).
```

* It should be either *has export functionality* or *has an export function*. I can't tell you why. :/
